GrapheneOS Camera is a modern camera app with a great user interface and a focus on privacy and security.

This is the new GrapheneOS Camera app based on Android's modern CameraX library. It replaces AOSP Camera for GrapheneOS.

GrapheneOS includes our own modern camera app focused on privacy and security. It includes modes for capturing images, videos and QR / barcode scanning along with additional modes based on CameraX vendor extensions (Portrait, HDR, Night, Face Retouch and Auto) on devices where they're available (not available on Pixels yet).

Modes are displayed as tabs at the bottom of the screen. You can switch between modes using the tab interface or by swiping left/right anywhere on the screen. The arrow button at the top of the screen opens the settings panel and you can close it by pressing anywhere outside the settings panel. You can also swipe down to open the settings and swipe up to close it. Outside of the QR scanning mode, there's a row of large buttons above the tab bar for switching between the cameras (left), capturing images and starting/stopping video recording (middle) and opening the gallery (right). The volume keys can also be used as an equivalent to pressing the capture button. While recording a video, the gallery button becomes an image capture button for capturing images.

Our Camera app provides the system media intents used by other apps to capture images / record videos via the OS provided camera implementation. These intents can only be provided by a system app since Android 11, so the quality of the system camera is quite important.

The app has an in-app gallery and video player for images/videos taken with it. It currently opens an external editor activity for the edit action. GrapheneOS comes with AOSP Gallery which provides an editor activity. You can install a nicer photo editor and the Camera app will be able to use it. We plan to replace AOSP Gallery with a standalone variant of the gallery we're developing for the Camera app in the future.

Using the default 4:3 aspect ratio for image capture is recommended since 16:9 is simply cropped output on all supported devices. A device oriented towards video recording might actually have a wider image sensor but that's not the case for Pixels or nearly any other smartphone.

Image capture uses lightweight HDR+ on all supported Pixels and HDRnet for the preview on 5th generation Pixels. Using the torch or camera flash will result in HDR+ being disabled which is why automatic flash isn't enabled by default. The lightweight HDR+ doesn't use as many frames as the more aggressive Google Camera HDR+. CameraX extensions will eventually provide support for an HDR mode with more aggressive HDR+ taking/combining more than only around 3 frames along with a Night mode providing the Night Sight variant of HDR+ inflating the light of the scene through combining the frames. Other fancy features like Portrait mode will also depend on CameraX extensions being provided in the future. There isn't a timeline for this but an initial implementation will likely be shipped within the next year for Pixels.

Zooming via pinch to zoom or the zoom slider will automatically make use of the wide angle and telephoto cameras on Pixels. 5th and 6th generation Pixels (4a (5G), 5, 5a, 6, 6 Pro) have a wide angle camera for zooming out to under 1x to capture a much wider field of view. Images taken with the wide angle lens won't match the quality of the normal camera, especially with 6th generation Pixels. Flagship 4th generation Pixels (4, 4 XL) have a telephoto camera providing 2x optical zoom and the Pixel 6 Pro has one providing 4x optical zoom.

By default, continuous auto focus, auto exposure and auto white balance are used across the whole scene. Tapping to focus will switch to auto focus, auto exposure and auto white balance based on that location. The focus timeout setting determines the timeout before it switches back the default mode. The exposure compensation slider on the left allows manually tuning exposure and will automatically adjust shutter speed, aperture and ISO without disrupting lightweight HDR+ support. Further configuration / tuning will be provided in the future.

The QR scanning mode only scans within the scanning square marked on the screen. The QR code should be aligned with the edges of the square but can have any 90 degree orientation. Non-standard inverted QR codes are fully supported. It's a very quick and high quality QR scanner able to easily scan very high density QR codes from Pixels. Every 2 seconds, it will refresh auto focus, auto exposure and auto white balance on the scanning square. It has full support for zooming in and out. The torch can be toggled with the button at the bottom center. The auto toggle at the bottom left can be used to toggle scanning for all supported barcode types. Alternatively, you can select which barcode types it should scan via the menu at the top. It only scans QR codes by default since that provides quick and reliable scanning. Most other types of barcodes can result in false positives. Each enabled type will slow down the scanning and will make it more prone to false positives especially with difficult to scan barcodes such as a dense QR code.

Camera permission is the only one that's required. Images and videos are stored via the Media Store API so media/storage permissions aren't required. The Microphone permission is needed for video recording by default but not when including audio is disabled. Location permission is only needed if you explicitly enabling location tagging, which is an experimental feature.

By default, EXIF metadata is stripped for captured images and only includes the orientation. Stripping metadata for videos is planned but not supported yet. Orientation metadata isn't stripped since it's fully visible from how the image is displayed so it doesn't count as hidden metadata and is needed for proper display. You can toggle off stripping EXIF metadata in the More Settings menu opened from the settings dialog. Disabling metadata stripping will leave the timestamp, phone model, exposure configuration and other metadata. Location tagging is disabled by default and won't be stripped if you enable it.